---
layout: post
title:  "The Future You Want"
date:   2014-08-20
---

As a sometimes-physicist, every time someone stuck in traffic looks up at the sky and wonders, ‘where the hell is my flying skateboard, anyway?‘, I feel a little guilty.  I’m truly sorry we haven’t built the future you want yet; I want it, too.  Some new things need to happen before we can.  The good news is that the barriers to those things are beginning to crumble, and a way forward is beginning to appear.

My last day at [TRIUMF][http://www.triumf.ca/] was something I think the developers in the audience can relate to – I had been hired as a front-end developer to design and build the UX and UI for the GRIFFIN experiment, and after two years of hacking it was finally time to ship; of course, the last 36 hours of uninterrupted desperate buttonmashing was when inspiration for a million totally super important new features struck my boss – we’ve all been there, that’s how it goes.  But despite (or because of?) my delirious gotta-ship mindset, I rode a steadily rising tide of excitement – for the first time (that I’ve been privy to), a world-class physics experiment was going to have a beautiful, thoughtful user interface, wholly on the web, leveraging new tools like node.js and Brick, and developed entirely open source.  The GRIFFIN collaboration showed a lot of courage in being willing to try things that were so far outside their comfort zone, and I was confident that great things would be in store for them as a result.

The thing was though, after I stamped that pre-release and packed up for my new life as the community manager at Mozilla Science Lab, that sense of great things being afoot didn’t abate.   I have been trying to land licks for years in the name of good computing in the sciences, but now, a community is beginning to emerge that seemed out of reach not too long ago – Software Carpentry is becoming a worldwide brand in software education from the ground up, and has inspired the new Data Carpentry project to do the same; Dryad has fought for and won the realization of open data in some of the life sciences, and GitHub, DAT, FigShare, Zenodo and others are making services available to carry this even further.  But maybe the most profound and important difference of all is the conversation that has begun to rumble the halls of science, and resonate with you, too; we are beginning to ask ourselves, why are we allowing paywalls and secrecy to cut us off from each other, and what can we achieve if we tear those barriers down?  What can we learn from the world of software developers to make science stronger, and how did the walls of the silos we find ourselves in ever grow so tall and so rigid?  MozFest and Maker Party and the Mozilla Science Sprint have shown that people of all backgrounds can successfully participate in a wide array of technical projects – so why isn’t that more the norm?   We have a tradition of half a millennium that has carried us from the geocentric universe to the doorstep of the stars.  But that tradition taught us to question everything; now’s the time to turn that lens on ourselves, and ask what we can do to reach even further.  The pieces are on the board; the orchestra is tuning up, and a signal is beginning to emerge from noise that we can just now begin to hear; if we can learn to work together again, in the open and in reach of all hands, there is nothing that isn’t on the table – nothing.  I think that’s what needs to happen if we are to take another giant leap in our lifetimes.

People are strongest when they are united, and science is strongest when it is free.  At the Mozilla Science Lab, my mission is to make the free and open web a vehicle for putting science in everyone’s hands, and a tool that helps feed that bottomless hunger we all feel to know our universe better, always better than ever before.  But I can’t do it alone – I need you, all of you to tell me what future you dream of.  Scientists, how can we remove the barriers to collaboration and free publication of code, data and journal articles you face?  Developers, how do we build an infrastructure that allows anyone to run the code to reproduce the analysis behind any scientific paper, and how can we build opportunities for you to jump into the science that interests you?  Educators, how do we bring software development literacy to as many people as possible?  And most of all, to everyone out in the wide world: what can we do to make science yours?  That above all: I believe that the opportunity to know your world is the inalienable birthright of every single person on this planet; that knowledge doesn’t belong in a silo, or an ivory tower or to a seeming distant coterie of experts; it belongs to you.  Together we can build that community; the opportunities are here, the time is now to hash out the future you want – but we need everyone to join the conversation at the Science Lab to make it so.

So get ahold of us at Mozilla Science Lab: community call, mailing list, or twitter feed (@MozillaScience), or Bill himself in the comments, @billdoesphysics on Twitter, or via the contact form below – looking forward to hearing from all of you!
Name(required)
Email(required)
Private Comment (public comments below)(required)



Check out the [Jekyll docs][jekyll] for more info on how to get the most out of Jekyll. File all bugs/feature requests at [Jekyll's GitHub repo][jekyll-gh].

[triumf]: http://www.triumf.ca/
[jekyll-gh]: https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll
[jekyll]:    http://jekyllrb.com
